---
layout:		post
title:		"Time in our Time"
date:			2018-11-02 11:11:11 +0000
categories:	time timezones
---
Just in time, for the time of year where some people can not keep their hands
off time itself.

The globe is a ball, and there is 360 degrees around a circle, and there is 24
hours in a cycle. That means each "one hour" segment spans 15Â°. If you look at
a [map of the timezones][time-zone-map], you see what this looks like in
practice. Except that this is not done properly and oftentimes whole countries
are offset a whole timezone or more from where they should be geographically.

Add to this the malpractice of daylight savings time, of displacing the clock by
one hour in spring and then rolling it back in autumn. [Others][22-reasons] have
gone through the trouble of gathering reasons why this is a bad idea, but
suffice to say there are medical reasons for why the practice is bad.

The world is, whether you like it or not, moving towards more of a globally
aware and active situation. Unless everyone does daylight savings at exactly the
same time all the time, it actually is detrimental from a global perspective.

A common argument here is: "But if I do not interact with anyone non-local you
are just making things hard for me".

True. Up to the point where you have got used to it. And get used to it you
will. Not every country drove on the right (and some still do not) but they made
the transition. If you scout through history, you find a lot of practices that
where abandoned and changed because there were good reasons to change. Things
like slavery and cannibalism were abandoned. We standardised on common ways to
measure weight, volume and length.

So the argument from a personal "I do not want to learn" perspective hold no
sway with me.

Before [telegraphs and railroads][history-railway-timezones] got common enough
and required a [standardised way of keeping time][railway-time] people just
stuck a stick in the mud and figured out what the exact stroke of noon was for
their exact geographic location. That would be pretty similar to villages
exactly to the north or south of there you were, but if you have to travel to
a village 85 mile west or 109 miles east - your watch would be wrong.

We have come a long way since those days and we now actually have
[UTC][universally-coordinated-time] and atomic clocks that are capable of
keeping time ridiculously well. There is no longer a problem with finding out
what the actual time is. So these days, **time** really is relative, and with
daylight savings time it is not even sane relative.

Another argument I heard - and keep this in mind for later - is: "you are trying
to make people get up in the middle of the night, change the meaning of morning,
noon and night!"

Nope. Morning, noon, night - they are all relative to the position of the sun in
the sky. Not one iota to what your clock claims the local time is. Do not
believe me? Try this:

Change your clock to be six hours earlier or later than what your local timezone
is. When it goes dark outside - ask yourself this: "Is it night now?"

If the answer is yes, but your clock says it's 6am and time to get up, what
would you trust more, what your eyes are telling you (the sun is setting and it
is becoming night) or what your clock tells you (it is morning, rise and shine)?

So what am I on about you ask.

What I am on about is that **time** in the sense of what our watches tell us the
time is, is something we can adapt and adapt to, and with relative ease. Why
would we want to do something like it? Because in an increasingly global
society it is beneficial to be able to talk about time and there is no ambiguity
about what you are referencing. The military already have this, and they call it
[Zulu Time][zulu-time].

In fact, without you knowing, you're already using it - you are just offset from
the zero meridien and sometimes depending on daylight savings and bit more or
less.

What if we stopped offsetting our clocks however? What if every clock in the
world told you what the present time **UTC** was?

"Oh my god, I would have to get up in the middle of the night, and think about
the kids!!"

Actually, no, you would not. What changes is merely the numbers, and it is not
that hard to get used to. For someone on the east coast USA, that would be UTC-4
today, if you started work at 0900EST, that merely happens to be written 1300UTC
and references the exact same time.

See UTC as *scheduling time*. Whenever you schedule something, if you schedule
that using UTC, there is **never** any question about when it will happen. Even
for someone that is halfway around the planet. 1300UTC is 1300UTC.

Sure, for someone in Los Angeles, it may initially be jarring to start work at
1700UTC and finish for the day at 0200UTC because they are UTC-8, or seeing
Seven Eleven open the doors at 1500UTC and close at 0700UTC. Nothing about that
has actually practically changed anything for anyone, beside it being clear to
everyone globally when you start work and when Seven Eleven opens and closes.

The attachment to "morning **must** be when the clock says 0600" is nothing more 
than an attachment to tradition. "noon **must** be when the sun is highest in
the sky" is still the case no matter what your clock claims the time is. For
those that complain about maybe having to learn something new, all learning is
daunting, but this is not actually that hard. Plus, it is laying the groundwork
for your children and their children to have an easier time in an increasingly
connected and global world.

What do you think will happen when we become star-faring and need effectively
"[Star Date][star-date]" in order to sync time with other planets and star
systems?


[time-zone-map]:	https://www.timeanddate.com/time/map/
[22-reasons]:		http://gothamist.com/2014/03/08/22_reasons_why_daylight_saving_time.php
[history-railway-timezones]: https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/railroads-create-the-first-time-zones
[railway-time]:	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Railway_time
[universally-coordinated-time]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time
[zulu-time]:		https://www.navysite.de/what/zulu.htm
[star-date]:		https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stardate
